# AI-Art-Done-Ordoliberally

I am interested in AI (assisted) art. For the sake of this document i am talking about things like Stable Diffusion, DALL-E and co which work by being trained on a large number of images created by humans and many still owned by their copyright holders. I definitely acknowledge that there are moral hazards and that this "tech" will be abused to hurt artists and i am not interested in helping that. The mere process of conscious selection in order to communicate or the planning of an automated selection process could satisfy my criteria for art because i think https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aleatoric_music can be art. I dislike an unconditional shunning of all AI generated art.

## Copyright still holds
I think if one uses AI which was trained using training data the users does not have a permission to make derivatives of is theft.
The severity of the theft depends on the particular case. Law can also decide to allow this theft. This doesn't make it good or bad. That makes it law. There is a difference.

If one posts an AI generated anime girl using a model some else trained than one is certainly at least plagiarizing and maybe stealing. If one is using an artists name in the prompt one is robbing.
If one were to be able to correctly attributes which artists work in the training data contributed one might be below the charges of plagiarism. If one has the license to remix all the art which went in to the model ones is legally fine. Finding out which artists contributed to what image is currently technically impossible.

I find generating an image using a model solely trained on public domain images and appropriately licensed modern works morally neutral. No such model exist. The use of that model by people to quickly generate an image to make their micro fiction on social media more attractive or as visually superior images compared to their own skills in their hobbyist ren’py novel is a net positive.

I find using a commercially trained AI model using images that company morally neutral but for the huge power that gives that company over art and as such problematic when used unreflectedly in a socially important meaning carrying context like art. It's use for stale commercial images were fine if that didn't deprive artist of their income which then produce less art which contributes to flourishing of society.

Taken together the negatives currently clearly outweigh the positives. It would be technically feasible today and i would be delighted for a CC-BY-SA-NC model fine tuned by volunteers to exist. A model trained exclusively on public domain images and images which require attribution with a complete list of all contributing artists where all artworks allow remixing but not necessarily commercially use and some requiring share-alike conditions. That way we could have most of the benefits for the small hobbyists which can create a more enjoyable hobby project given their limited budget and skills. 

There mere fact of mentioning such model makes one quite unpopular with many AI art fans which tend to be of the "copyright is dead or morally bankrupt and only protects big companies" crowd. I do believe copyright suck but i also believe that it if i don't respect copyright i am also disrespecting the artist which currently gain at least a little protection from it.

# Art is a means of communication. 

How artistic a work can be is restricted by how much the (potential) artist put into the work and how much control the creator has about the result. I believe that a pen stroke made on AI art is not worth less than that same pen stroke made on any other piece of paper. If the downloaded image or AI generated image is not chosen arbitrarily but chosen with purpose such that the message aligns with the pen strokes on top this combination can add artistic value. I believe that this value created by interaction should mostly be attributed to the person using the AI image generator.

If someone generates images from a prompt and then spends 20 min selecting the image one likes best, it is not justified to call that his art. Independent how visual pleasing the result this is at best equivalent to writing the prompt on a sheet of paper + the closest image they could find on the internet without attribution.

If one iterates on the prompt, tunes some numerical parameters one has more expressive control. Multiple hours spend on a single result it might become buying a block printing mask from amazon and printing that and reprinting that/tuning colors until ones is satisfied with the result

Using a "controlnet" to pose a character might be equivalent to posing a modular block print figure. Regional prompts might be equivalent assemble a scene of similar complexity using modular block printing part.
Redrawing things using in painting to fix up parts might be doing minor corrections and improvements on the mask.

Taking an image yourself and running image to image might be equivalent to using photoshop to posterize that image into a printing masks and then doing further processing.

The viral "Spiral town ai" image would be cutting the mask using a CNC and playing with the colors one different parts of the final mask. In that case the creator can not take any "credit" for the contrast to align of the image content. That is just an artifact of the printing process. But realizing that this printing process can do that and finding the right parameters to do so is innovation and genuine artistic innovation. People jumping on the bandwagon and reproducing it later should at least get credit for how much they refine the idea.

An AI model turning a hand drawn sketch into the style of dead artist adds little artistic value as the choice to choose an AI model and pick a style doesn't add much creative expression. Training models to imitate a living artist is vile. For it might hurt the artist and it is not enabling people to explore what is possible to create or what they personally like. I think of that as "artistic incest" and "inbreeding" of lineages of inspiration giving raise to art. Finding out what prompts you can use with a not inbreed model to get close to another artists style is a bit more worthwhile if one uses that as a starting point for further exploration of space of self expression AI has.

AI art is in it's infancy and we as society don't know how to deal with it yet. I have my ideas but i would like to see them challenged.

## Good communication requires conscious choices

When an original art work is created by an artist a lot of choices are made to produce a decent result. Making those choices requires practice, skill and ability. Using an image generation AI as a tool trivializes making many of these choices by automating them. Having an AI fill in what would be canvas for expressing certain choices makes the image less personal and more average. Interacting with Stable Diffusion is a very awkward interface to make the same choices artists are used to make with their tools. It is an inherent consequence of any medium that many choices which are not relevant to the point which is attempted to be comunicated can have such a strong impact on the reception of the message that the intended meaning is overshadowed entirely. Practice, skill and ability are required to make those choices unoffensive to a recipient so the actual message can be recieved. Artist don't just make those choices in an unoffensive way. These choices are used for communcation too. I imagine part of the reason AI generated images feel off is because when those choices are filled in in an average way then they don't support the main communication. This is not something better AI can fix. If the creator didn't think how shadows could be used to reinforce their message an AI can never add that intention back. Even if the result were pixel to pixel identical to what would have been produced if the intention was expressed the image can never transmit that intention.

## AI generated images are taking bandwidth in a shared spectrum

Creators which aren't aware that those aspects can be used to communicate or don't put extrodinary effort in to these creations thus speak a crude dialect of what is possible with art. People not studied in art which are unaware of the large parts of the language are more receptive to the messages send through AI art because while the choices which they can't interpret atleast aren't made in a way which is distracting to them. Thus AI image generation enables communcation using less effort and intention which is still acceptable and maybe rewarded by a (lay) audience. AI generated images enable accidental and malicious plagiarism. Given that image generation models today don't do attribution to the work it is based on it is impossible to tell the difference without understanding the creators intention which usually go unshared and are easy to lie about. One could argue that thus any AI generated image should be treated as maliscous plagiarism and any attention by the lay audience is also undeserved. I can think of more reasons then "audience likes the plagiarised part" for why people enjoy some AI generated image and i invite you to also allow for such reasons. People could genuinely resonate the message that that person is trying to communicate even when they do so incredibly crudely. They might still try to tell something even if the AI might drown out their intention. People could also resonante with a message the AI put in there without intention from the creator. Thus currently we are left with a strange superposition of AI art being vile plagerism or genuine expression. The vile plagerism is what motivates the commercialisation of the technology.

## Finger count ultimately doesn't matter but i get why it does for many people today and calling AI art bad is actually harmful

There is nothing that makes an image which has 7 fingers on some hands less worthwhile than one which has 5 fingers. Making fun of people who post images with corruptions is toxic to the extend it is done today. 

- If the person is using the image the convey a mood they actually might not care about finger count. We currently have no socially expected way to indicate that an image is just for mood transmission.
- The person might be new to the tool and might not have learned to use it well enough not for them to fix it or fixing something like that might be gatekept behind payment or time investment they can't afford and want show of their early efforts.
- The person might purposefully paint 6 or 7 fingers.

This finger call out behavior makes sense:
- people might misinterpret the intention of the person posting the image as it being comparable to work which requires much more effort when another interpretation is intended
- in particular free models with less compute needs suffer from this this. It being an indicator of low effort work.
- people want to shun people and especially people new to the technology so it is used less. For that shilling effect it actually doesn't matter if 6 finger hand was drawn purpose or not.

It is an immune response but the results of it are just that the AI art community becomes more isolated and therefor worse and grifters become a larger share. If the summary tone is that AI art we discourage people experimenting with the tools to better understand them. We discourage people finding workflows which involve them using AI art somewhere even if that makes art more accessible. We just end up in a world where the tool is monopolized by people who don't care about art and instead only care for rent seeking by tricking less art aware people. I see no positive payoff calling out pictures with 6 or 7 images as bad. The grifters aiming to trick people for a quick buck using AI art won't be impacted while all the more honest or freeing uses of AI art will be hampered. They do not care about the long term success because they will move on to the next grift.


# Not all AI artists ...

Shunning "AI art" in general seems an easy way to address all those issues without changing anything. Simple solutions have their elegance. Even better is anti-big company and aligns yourself with labour action by the screen writers guild against Holywood. I hope i did an adequate job summarising the main concerns with "AI art". I supported those concerns by my own arguments which is how i can most clearly think about them. If i missed some core aspect i'll gladly have update my views. Given my representation of the serious problems with "AI art" i still believe that even on the poinsoned ground mostly shaped by industry interestest there bloom flowers worth preserving and if we can manage to draw a line of standards and expected behaviour which includes acceptable use of those tools we have a stronger case against industry. It is harder to be characterized as Luddite if technology is embraced strongly in ways compatible with the underlying values. Those AI models are themselves interesting artefacts worth studying in their own right. Those AI models can be accessiblity tools. Education about art history, interpretation of and communication through art is still as interesting to people whose tool of choice is AI image generation. The term "Democratizing art" has been scoffed at as a blunt tool wielded by the ideology of "the freer the market the freer the people". But that rebuke is a lot less interesting then: "According to our democratic and humanitarian principles your use of AI art can be democratising/freeing/enabling if ...". It is not my position to decide what comes after that if. I wish for my own selfish interests that the art community should have some space for the use of AI image generation. I am happy to follow certain expectations on my behvaiour. I am appealing to my own selfish interests not because i don't have better arguements but because it wouldn't add anything to the arguement. If my appeal is not accepted in this form then changing my appeal just seems like manipulating. The standards demanded could be unreachable for me and i would still try to match them as good as i can.

# Harm reduction

## Art serves a purpose in society
Art throughout history always has been a socially sanctioned mechanism to reproduce culture and society. One only has to look into art history and how it impacted actual history and reflected it's interpretation at particular points in time. I acknowledge that by saying some AI generated images should be treated as art i implicitly say that i think society should consent to the social consequences of AI art. I hold myself to that standard and i am hold a position that my opinions would benefit society as whole while also not making any minority suffer. I am welcome to be challenged on that

I also believe that there is any "putting the AI back in the bottle". So the best i can hope for is harm reduction. This includes demanding that society provides for artists if any of them got unemployed through the automation and enabling them find other fulfilling activity should they be unable to continue their learned profession. I think that should apply to all displaced by automation. That many artist are "fake self employed" makes it more complicated.

I don't think we need novel concepts to regulate that AI. I believe we just need to apply laws we had before AI consequently. Sadly this sensible interpretation is being hampered by competing interests: 

- AI can't be the tool we use to skip the need for a painful copyright reform and usher in a liberal age. Copyright might have little acceptance among a growing demographic but that demographic disrespecting copyright mostly hurts the smaller players.
- We shouldn’t allow it to be a tool to pervert consent given in the past to endlessly plaster on the face of dead actors on faceless new talent while the udnerlying material is still held by a single company.

## A proposal
Just let all humans act like these "truths" are self evident to tame the industrial side:

- portraying AI generated art as hand drawn should be treated the same way as lying about the creation process is today 
- the image is a derived work from all the artist contributing to the model until proven otherwise. This proof (which is currently not known to be possible) can be a bit non perfect but should be as perfect as feasible given a particular cost and efforts should be taken to lower this attribution cost over time.
- if the creative process is sufficiently involved to reach the same threshold of originality used for other kinds of works one can call a result their creation. Due to the blackbox nature of the AI models it is upon the creator to substantiate their claim
- Works not in the public domain need an appropriate level of consent of the copyright holder to be used in AI training. This level varies by use and is stronger for bigger and more commercial efforts. The best and most practical way to consent to this is to permit a collective artist controlled cooperative to do collective bargaining and can grant a license for work of many right holders to be used in training. A https://www.bildkunst.de/service/extended-collective-licenses to train AI on comtemporary works after permission have been granted. This same organization should also allow for explicit opt-out under which circumstances it might not until the extinction of copyright be permitted to use them for AI training data. That way compliance can be checked for both.
- The AI training industry should be protected from sudden or outrageous license fee raises after they invested majorly into training a model. (I want to this to be a good faith solution which works for all parties. This does enable the AI training industry to pay more as they don't need to insure the raise risk as much.)
- Fees should be inflation adjusted in an planable manners.
- Artistic incest is vile. A world where all future work is merely derived from the past should be prevented. AI art is in principle able to do novel things
- People wanting to positively create art need to signal strongly signal their intention and be responsible and transparent about their language and presentation if they hope to be treated differently
- The art community could welcome those and welcome them if the behave according to certain standards derived from the values which the general AI art opposition is based on.
- Innovations in art are historically often widely recognized only after the death of the artist. AI art has no right to expect that it should be treated well. Still we should whether the other harm reduction steps are performed or not all should be able to say "I can't categorically exclude the possibility that an AI system not unsimilar to this one could play a major core in producing something i would recognize as art and can respect.".
